ACCESS-NRI Releases information (#992)
ACCESS-Hive/access-hive.github.io: docs/about/releases.md

[Hive Forum]: https://forum.access-hive.org.au
# ACCESS-NRI Release Stages

We develop and share our model configurations[^1] and tools in stages. Each stage has a different purpose and level of readiness. These terms are used to give a general indication on the state of the product you want to use and things to be aware of:
<!-- color text like table -->
- **Prototype (not shown in table):**  Early versions shared with a small group of experts to explore new ideas. These are not polished or complete, and may change quickly. 

- **Alpha:**{: .nri-danger-color } Early testing phase. The core features are in place, but things may change. No long-term support or maintenance. Feedback at this stage helps shape the product.

- **Beta:**{: .nri-orange-color } More stable versions open to a wider group. Most features and documentation are ready, and we welcome testing by anyone interested. Changes may still occur. No long-term support or maintenance.

> - **Full Release:**{: .nri-green-color} Fully tested, verified and documented. Supported versions with maintenance. Bitwise reproducible.[^2] These are the stable versions we recommend for research publication. 

Reviewer: > These are the stable versions we recommend for research publication.

Given @AndyHoggANU advocated for removing this in the table, I think it should be removed here as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Full Release:**{: .nri-green-color} Fully tested, verified and documented. Supported versions with maintenance. Bitwise reproducible.[^2]  
```

<link rel="stylesheet" href="/css/release-table.css">

[Hive Forum]: https://forum.access-hive.org.au
# ACCESS-NRI Release Stages

> We develop and share our model configurations and tools in stages. Each stage has a different purpose and level of readiness: 

Author: added a sentence https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/992/commits/4ddfff774b6d2941a7654bc00732505870298c61

<!-- color text like table -->
- **Prototype (not shown in table):**  Early versions shared with a small group of experts to explore new ideas. These are not polished or complete, and may change quickly. 

> - <span style="color:rgb(var(--danger-color))"><b>Alpha:</b></span> Early access for technically skilled testers. The core features are in place, but things may change, no long-term support or maintenance. Feedback at this stage helps shape the product.

Reviewer: I'd prefer to remove the word phrase "technically skilled". It kind of implies a required skill level to test things and that's not necessarily the most useful kind of feedback. Could also put people off from wanting to engage.

> - <span style="color:rgb(var(--danger-color))"><b>Alpha:</b></span> Early access for technically skilled testers. The core features are in place, but things may change, no long-term support or maintenance. Feedback at this stage helps shape the product.

Author: ```suggestion
- <span style="color:rgb(var(--danger-color))"><b>Alpha:</b></span> Early testing phase. The core features are in place, but things may change. No long-term support or maintenance. Feedback at this stage helps shape the product.
```

- <span style="color:rgb(var(--warning-color))"><b>Beta:</b></span> More stable versions open to a wider group. Most features and documentation are ready, and we welcome testing by anyone interested. Changes may still occur. No long-term support or maintenance.

> - <span style="color:rgb(var(--success-color))"><b>Full Release:</b></span> Fully tested, verified and documented. Supported versions with maintenance. These are the stable versions we recommend for research publication. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- <span style="color:rgb(var(--success-color))"><b>Full Release:</b></span> Fully tested, verified and documented. Supported versions with maintenance. Bitwise reproducible.[^2] These are the stable versions we recommend for research publication. 
```

> Note that these release definitions will not be applied retroactively to any model or tool releases. 

Author: ```suggestion
Note that these release definitions will not be applied retroactively to any model configurations or tool releases. 
```

## Release stages for model configurations[^1]

> The below table has some details for each release stage of ACCESS-NRI supported models.

Author: ```suggestion
The below table has some details for each release stage of ACCESS-NRI supported model configurations.
```

<!-- <div class="release-table" markdown="1"> -->

|   | ALPHA | BETA | FULL RELEASE |
|---| ----- | ---- | ------- |
|**Overall state of product**|**Unstable**|**Somewhat stable**|**Stable**|
|How to access and run the model configuration| Pre-release module | Pre-release module | Model/version module|

> |Model configuration(s)[^1] | In development, unstable | In testing, relatively stable | Versioned, major versions bitwise reproducible[^2] |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I think we should remove this line. It's still unclear to me what we mean by model configurations here. Instead I suggest adding "Bitwise reproducible" to the text above.

|Input files for configurations | Not yet managed[^3] | Managed[^3] | Managed[^3], FAIR |

> |Availability & Maintenance of the deployed model | Short-term, for alpha testers only | Until next beta or release | Long-term[^4] |

Reviewer: "or full release" I had this suggestion too!

> |User support (via [Hive Forum]) |No guarantee, for alpha testers only |Until next beta or release |Fully supported[^4]|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|User support (via [Hive Forum]) |No guarantee, for alpha testers only |Until next beta or full release |Fully supported[^4]|
```

> |Spin-up and Control experiment(s) |N/A |Under validation (if available) |Validated and published when available |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Spin-up and control experiment(s) |N/A |Under validation (if available) |Validated and published when available |
```

Reviewer: Can I clarify what is meant by this? Is it suggesting that it's done at release?

I think that's problematic as there are times when the control runs will be done after release.

|Documentation on Hive Docs |Unpublished |Published publicly with “*beta*” caveat |Published publicly|
|Optimisation & scaling |No guarantee |In progress |Complete |
|DOI |None |None |DOI issued; any model updates receive new DOIs |

> |Announcements to the community |Direct contact with alpha testers. No formal announcement. |Public post on [Hive Forum]. Mentioned in ACCESS-NRI newsletter with caveats. |Public post on [Hive Forum]. On ACCESS-NRI website, newsletter, social media, and media release.|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Announcements to the community |Direct contact with alpha testers. No formal announcement. |Public post on [Hive Forum]. |Public post on [Hive Forum]. On ACCESS-NRI website, newsletter, and social media. May include a media release.|
```

Confirmed with Natalia that the beta releases are not currently in the newsletters (though we can add back in later if we decide they should be). Media releases are only on occasion for major releases (e.g. first full release of a model configuration for a particular model).

<!-- </div> -->

> [^1]: A model configuration is the entire setup for a model experiment run. It is the model code, the parameters, and input files. It is essentially an experiment waiting to happen. 

Author: ```suggestion
[^1]: A model configuration is the entire setup for a model experiment run. It is the compiled model code, the parameters, and input files. It is essentially an experiment waiting to happen. 
```

[^2]: By bitwise reproducible, we mean that a model configuration will produce the same answers if re-run on Gadi (with the same layout, number of processors, etc., all of which are specified in a model configuration). 

> [^3]: *Managed* here means that the input files are collected in a specific place and are incorporated into the model deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[^3]: *Managed* here means that the input files are collected in a specific place and are incorporated into the model configuration deployment.
```

> [^4]: Each release will have its own timeframe for availability, maintenance, and support. The timeframe will be communicated at the time of release, and will be based on factors that include: What our users need; Availability, and suitability, of new models; Machine changes (older models may not be ported to new machines); Overall support burden (if we support too many models our ability to update current models or develop new ones is impaired); Collaborators (if we use a model component that is deprecated it may make it harder for us to support it.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[^4]: Each release will have its own timeframe for availability, maintenance, and support. The timeframe will be based on factors that include: What our users need; Availability, and suitability, of new models; Machine changes (older models may not be ported to new machines); Overall support burden (if we support too many models our ability to update current models or develop new ones is impaired); Collaborators (if we use a model component that is deprecated it may make it harder for us to support it.)
```
